Interop message passing explainer (#1268)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/stack/interop/message-passing.mdx

import { Callout, Steps } from 'nextra/components'

import { InteropCallout } from '@/components/WipCallout'

<InteropCallout />

# Interop message passing overview

> The low level [`CrossL2Inbox`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/CrossL2Inbox.sol) contract provides for basic executing message functionality, it verifies whether an initiating message is available or not.
> However, this contract does not check what is the destination of a message, whether it has already been processed, etc.
> The [`L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.sol) contracts sits on top of `CrossL2Inbox` and provides the full functionality expected of a cross domain messenger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The low-level [`CrossL2Inbox`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/CrossL2Inbox.sol) contract handles basic message execution. It verifies whether an initiating message exists but does not check the message's destination, processing status, or other attributes.

The [`L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.sol) contract extends `CrossL2Inbox` by providing complete cross-domain messaging functionality.
```

> A cross-chain message in the Superchain is two transactions: an *intiating message* on the source chain and an *executing mesage* on the destination chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Superchain, a cross-chain message consists of two transactions: an **initiating message** on the source chain and an executing message on the **destination chain**.
```

Author: I'm used to the convention that *italics* are used for emphasis, such as when defining a term, and **bold** is used for UI elements that are to be pressed. Is that no longer the convention?

Reviewer: Beyond that, there are typo's.

> A cross-chain message in the Superchain is two transactions: an *intiating message* on the source chain and an *executing mesage* on the destination chain.
> For high level interop messages, both messages use `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` on their respective chains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For high-level interoperability, both messages use the `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` contract on their respective chains.
```

## Initiating message

```mermaid

sequenceDiagram
    participant app as Application
    box rgba(0,0,0,0.1) Source Chain
      participant srcContract as Source Contract
      participant srcXdom as L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger
      participant log as Event Log
    end
    app->>srcContract: 1. Send a message
    srcContract->>srcXdom: 2. Call contract A<br/>in chainId B<br/>with calldata C
    note over srcXdom: 3. Sanity checks
    srcXdom->>log: 4. Log event SentMessage
    
```

1.  The application sends a transaction to a contract on the source chain.

2.  The contract calls [`L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.SendMessage`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L127-L154).
    The call requires these parameters:

>     *   `_destination`, the chain ID of the destination blockchain.
>     *   `_target`, the address of the contract on that blockchain.
>     *   `_message`, the actual message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   `_destination`: The chain ID of the destination blockchain.
    *   `_target`: The address of the contract on that blockchain.
    *   `_message`: The actual message.
```

        This message is provided to `_target` as calldata, which means it includes a function selector and the parameters for that function call.

3.  `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` on the source chain verifies the message is legitimate:
    *   The destination chain is one to which this chain can send messages.
    *   The destination chain is *not* the source chain.
    *   The target is neither `CrossL2Inbox` nor `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger`.

4.  `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` emits a log entry.
    In addition to the parameters, the log entry also includes:

>     *   `_nonce`, a [nonce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_nonce) value to ensure the message is only executed once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   `_nonce`: A [nonce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_nonce) value to ensure the message is only executed once.
```

>     *   `_sender`, the contract that sent the cross domain message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   `_sender`: The contract that sent the cross domain message.
```

## Executing message

```mermaid

sequenceDiagram
    participant app as Application
    box rgba(0,0,0,0.1) Source Chain
      participant log as Event Log
    end    
    participant super as OP-Supervisor<br/>(destination chain<br/>node)
    box rgba(0,0,0,0.1) Destination Chain
      participant dstXdom as L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger
      participant Xinbox as CrossL2Inbox
      participant dstContract as Destination Contract
    end
    log->>super: 1. Initiating message log event
    app->>dstXdom: 2. Send an executing message
    dstXdom->>Xinbox: 3. Verify the initiating message is real 
    note over dstXdom: 4. Sanity checks
    dstXdom->>dstContract: 5. Call with provided calldata
```

> 1.  Before the executing message is processed, the log event of the initiating message has to get to OP-Proposer on the destination chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Before the executing message is processed, the log event of the initiating message has to get to `op-proposer` on the destination chain.
```

2.  The application (or a contract calling on the application's behalf) calls [`L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.SendMessage.relayMessage`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L156-L216).
    This call includes the message that was sent (`_sendMessage`), as well as the [fields required to find that message (`_id`)](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/interfaces/L2/ICrossL2Inbox.sol#L4-L10).

> 3.  `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` uses `CrossL2Inbox` to verify the message really was sent from the source.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  The `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` uses `CrossL2Inbox` to verify the message was sent from the source.

```

import { Callout, Steps } from 'nextra/components'

import { InteropCallout } from '@/components/WipCallout'

<InteropCallout />

# Interop message passing overview

The low level [`CrossL2Inbox`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/CrossL2Inbox.sol) contract provides for basic executing message functionality, it verifies whether an initiating message is available or not.
However, this contract does not check what is the destination of a message, whether it has already been processed, etc. 

> The [`L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.sol) contracts sits on top of `CrossL2Inbox` and provides the full functionality expected of a cross domain messenger.

Reviewer 2: Should we add a reminder that: 

A cross-chain(interop?) message in the Superchain is two transactions: an intiating message on the source chain and an executing mesage on the destination chain.

Author: Yes.

## Initiating message

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we add OP-Supervisor into this diagram so its easier for the reader to grok how L2toL2CDM + OP Supervisor work together to facilitate interoP?

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 2: Should we add OP-Supervisor into this diagram so its easier for the reader to grok how L2toL2CDM + OP Supervisor work together to facilitate interoP?

Author: Yes.

> sequenceDiagram

Reviewer 2: For both diagrams (initating + executing) consider using this diagram, without the asset bridging, where it shows user, l2l2cdm, l2inbox (new)

https://specs.optimism.io/interop/predeploys.html#diagram

Author: I prefer my diagrams, especially now that the text is bigger because we removed superfluous details as you suggested.

    participant app as Application
    box rgba(0,0,0,0.1) Source Chain
      participant srcContract as Source Contract
      participant srcXdom as L2ToL2Cross...
      participant log as Event Log
    end

>     box rgba(0,0,0,0.1) Destination Chain

Reviewer 2: What is the destination chain l2l2cdm+smart contract trying to convey in this diagram?

Author: I was trying to have all the components in both diagrams, but it's getting too complicated, I'll change that.

      participant dstXdom as L2ToL2Cross...
      participant dstContract as Destination Contract
    end
    app->>srcContract: 1. Send a message
    srcContract->>srcXdom: 2. Call contract A<br/>in chainId B<br/>with calldata C
    srcXdom->>log: 3. Log event SentMessage
    
```

1. The application sends a transaction to a contract on the source chain.

2. The contract calls [`L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.SendMessage`](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/develop/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/L2/L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger.sol#L127-L154). 
   The call requires these parameters:

   - `_destination`, the chain ID of the destination blockchain.
   - `_target`, the address of the contract on that blockchain.
   - `_message`, the actual message.
     This message is provided to `_target` as calldata, which means it includes a function selector and the parameters for that function call.

> 3. After a few sanity checks, `L2ToL2CrossDomainMessenger` emits a log entry.

Reviewer 2: What does `After a few sanity checks` mean?
